i received a question from the audience
about metaphysics
probably the most significant thing to
note
is that i've now recorded more than one
thousand videos
on one thousand different topics
and never once have i been asked
anything to do with metaphysics never
once
until today have i been asked how my
philosophy applies to metaphysics i've
never been asked
what possible meaning the study of
metaphysics has had in my life
right and i think this really does
reflect the profound
triviality of metaphysics from a mature
21st century perspective now
if i were to engage in a critique of
metaphysics it would really be
the habit of mind that becomes
inculcated
into us through metaphysics rather than
any particular
posit i would say that some assertions
in metaphysics are so uncontroversial
so bland that nobody bothers to dispute
them
and then we cross over a dotted line
where seemingly everything that's
posited
or disputed within metaphysics is such
dangerous lunacy
that it generally belongs in the
province of religion
indeed even of religious fanaticism and
not of philosophy not of
politics so to give an example of
something very bland
in metaphysics but again my warning
would be to try to imagine the habits of
mind
you'd cultivate if you were really
raised with this sort of education
someone might say to you that we never
see gravity we see objects falling
we see the effects of gravity but we
never perceive
gravity itself but we can posit
this prior entity this real
thing whatever gravity truly is
out of sight out of mind to some extent
unknowable and to some extent something
we can
speculate about and then they can start
to talk about this this metaphysical
concept
of gravity that's the sort of reasoning
most people just do not
bother to object to and it slips into
madness and lunacy when they say
something to you like
well you can see the effects of
intelligence
right in the same way you see things
falling and you then infer or impute
this thing called gravity
well you see someone doing intelligent
things you see someone acting down
but then there is this there is this
real entity
there is this reality of whatever
intelligence is
that something quite different from its
particular effect its particular
behaviors
oh well you know you feel you know this
person
you feel you know their personality but
then there's this metaphysical notion of
the soul
right something prior to and something
more real than
some transcendental super thing
it's not really just a thing it's a
super thing that only exists through our
inference and imputation and of course
the greatest
metaphysical football of them all is the
judeo-christian god
like oh you just see the universe but
there was this
thing before the universe now
why is this so rarely asked about or
worth debating
if you met someone who was really into
kind of cosmological
theoretical physics like someone who's
really into theories about gravity and
the origin of the universe
and you see you deadpan sirius said to
them well
given what we know about the existence
of the universe there must be something
prior to the universe and then this
person wants to
refer to this as god it would just be
laughably meaningless
i mean if you make this inference if you
make this imputation
there's no connection between that
notion of god
and the book you know written in
ancient greek called the new testament
yes by the way the new testament was
written in greek not hebrew
deal with it wasn't written in aramaic
either you know
well you have this kind of you know
literary tradition
starting in ancient greek with these
stories and it's you know it's concerned
with
the roman empire conquering jerusalem
and you know
the temple and the politics and you know
moral questions
there is just no reason why you
connected to this this notion of
abstract physics
now in terms of the um essentializing
tendency of of mind here that people
train themselves in
if they revere metaphysics and metaphase
gold thinking
it might seem harmless for you to look
at
intelligence and then think there is
this thing that truly
that truly is intelligent look at the
person and then think there is this
thing called the soul there is this
essence of who the person
really is um
you know i eat food some number of
hours later i go to the bathroom
i never see digestion right
what what is this true thing what is
this metaphysical
concept of digestion that exists prior
to and outside of our merely physical
knowledge
of digestion there's absolutely no
reason to think this is something
meaningful inspirational significant or
even worth
debating digestion is an abstraction
abstractions contain less information
than particulars that's all it is these
concepts
the soul intelligence even gravity
the riddle you're playing with you know
it's like a game of solitaire you're
dealing with cards
it's just that you're playing with
abstractions and then wanting them
and wanting to believe that those
abstractions are
more real than the real things they
describe
or they summarize and they're not the
reality is empirically
we see things falling and we generalize
and talk about
gravity it's a generalization it's an
abstraction right we see people doing
intelligent things and we describe them
as intelligent people and we think about
intelligence and intelligence is just an
abstraction right
intelligence is less real not
more real than what we can empirically
observe
so the storied history of metaphysics
from my perspective
should end with this century the 21st
century
in the same way that the practice of
circumcision
should end uh with this century all it
is is taking a
fundamentally superstitious frame of
mind
and kind of painting it with the colors
of proper science or proper philosophy
it can never lead us to any conclusions
about anything
other than the psychology of human
stupidity
[Music]
maybe we can we can practice